Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
39  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education System in India 
    
  DR. JAYANTIBHAI I. PATEL 
     Associate Professor, 
    Swami Vivekanand Sarvodaya Education College, 
     Nagalpur, Mehsana, Gujarat (India) 
    
Abstract: 
Education system in India lays more stress on studies. It is an  exam system not an education 
system. Why is it so that we can remember the movies and not our chapters? Indian education 
system needs a lot of changes. 
 
The system of education in India should be learning-centric rather than exam-centric. Children 
must be allowed to choose subjects according to their interests. Instead of gaining knowledge 
from voluminous books and lectures, children must be made to interact in groups and express 
their views on various topics. Rather than taking notes from the teacher and textbooks, children 
must  be  made  to  research  information  on  their  own  from  library  books  and  the  Internet  and 
share them in the class. This will help them develop good reading habits, self-confidence and 
openness to criticism. It will also help them in developing critical reading and analytical skills. 
Children will be able to remember what they learn when they apply it practically. They must be 
taken  on  field  trips  to  museums,  labs,  planetariums,  excavation  sites,  botanical  gardens,  etc. 
where they can learn by interacting with knowledgeable and experienced people in varied fields. 
It will also help them improve their communication skills. In this article the author of this article 
wants to focus on the basic education system of education in our country. 
Keywords: Education system, Homeschooling, 10+2+3 Pattern, Primary Education, Private 
Education, Higher Education, Secondary Education 
 
1. Introduction 
Education in India is provided by the public sector as well as the private sector, with control and 
funding  coming  from  three  levels:  central,  state,  and  local.  Taxila  was  the  earliest  recorded 
centre of higher learning in India from at least 5th century BCE and it is debatable whether it 
could be regarded a university or not. The Nalanda University was the oldest university-system 
of education in the world in the modern sense of university. Western education became ingrained 
into Indian society with the establishment of the British Raj. 
 
Education in  India falls  under the control  of both  the  Union Government  and the states, with 
some  responsibilities  lying  with  the  Union  and  the  states  having  autonomy  for  others.  The 
various articles  of the  Indian Constitution  provide for education as  a fundamental  right.  Most 
universities in India are controlled by the Union or the State Government. 
 
India has made progress in terms of increasing primary education attendance rate and expanding 
literacy  to  approximately  two  thirds  of  the  population.  India's  improved  education  system  is 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
40  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
often cited as one of the main contributors to the economic rise of India.   Much of the progress, 
especially  in  higher  education  and  scientific  research,  has  been  credited  to  various  public 
institutions. The private education market in India is merely 5% although in terms of value is 
estimated to be worth $40 billion in 2008 and will increase to $68–70 billion by 2012. 
 
However,  India  continues  to  face  stern  challenges.  Despite  growing  investment  in  education, 
25% of its population is still illiterate; only 15% of Indian students reach high school, and just 
7% graduate. The quality of education whether at primary or higher education is significantly 
poor as compared with major developing nations. As of 2008, India's post-secondary institutions 
offer  only  enough  seats  for  7%  of  India's  college-age  population,  25%  of  teaching  positions 
nationwide are vacant, and 57% of college professors lack either a master's or PhD degree.  
 
As of 2011, there are 1522 degree-granting engineering colleges in India with an annual student 
intake of 582,000, plus  1,244 polytechnics with an  annual  intake of 265,000. However, these 
institutions face shortage of faculty and concerns have been raised over the quality of education. 
In India education system is not based on pure merit, but it’s based on caste based reservations. 
In universities/Colleges/Institutions affiliated to federal government there is minimum 50% of 
reservations  applicable to  various castes.  At state level  it varies.  State of Andhra Pradesh has 
83.33% of reservations as on 2012, which is highest percentage of reservations in India. So the 
state is popularly known as the state that killed merit. 
 
2. History of Education 
Brahmin gurus imparted education by means of begging and not through charging fees or funds 
from the students or their guardians. Later, temples were also centrees of education. Religiouis 
education was compulsory but secular subjects were also taught. Students were required to be 
brahmacharis or celibates. The knowledge in these orders was often related to the tasks a section 
of  the  society  had  to  perform.  The  priest  class,  the  Brahmins,  were  imparted  knowledge  of 
religion, philosophy, and other ancillary branches while the warrior class, the  Kshatriya, were 
trained in the various aspects of warfare. The business class, the Vaishya, were taught their trade 
and  the  working  class  of  the  Shudras  was  generally  deprived  of  educational  advantages.  The 
book  of  laws,  the  Manusmriti,  and  the  treatise  on  statecraft  the  Arthashastra  were  among  the 
influential works of this era which reflect the outlook and understanding of the world at the time. 
Secular  institutions  cropped  up  along  with  Hindu  temples,  mutts  and  Buddhist  monasteries. 
These  institutions  imparted  practical  education,  e.g.  medicine.  A  number  of  urban  learning 
centers became increasingly visible from the period between 500 BCE to 400 CE.The important 
urban centers of learning were Taxila (in modern day Pakistan) and Nalanda in Bihar, among 
others. These institutions systematically imparted knowledge and attracted a number of foreign 
students to study topics such as Vedic and Buddhist literature, logic, grammar, etc. Chanakya, a 
brahmin teacher, was among the most famous  teachers of Taxila, associated with founding of 
Mauryan Empire. 
By  the  time  of  the  visit  of  the  Islamic  scholar  Alberuni  (973–1048  CE),  India  already  had  a 
sophisticated system of mathematics. 
With the arrival of the British Raj in India the modern European education came to India. British 
Raj was reluctant to introduce mass education system as it was not their interest. The colonial 
educational policy was deliberately one of reducing indigenous culture and religion, an approach  
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
41  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
which became known as Macaulayism. This dramatically changed the whole educational system. 
Educated people failed to get jobs because the language in which they received their education 
had  become  redundant.  The  system  soon  became  solidified  in  India  as  a  number  of  primary, 
secondary, and tertiary centers for education cropped up during the colonial era. Between 1867 
and  1941  the  British  increased  the  percentage  of  the  population  in  primary  and  secondary 
education from around 0.6% of the population in 1867 to over 3.5% of the population in 1941. 
However, this was much lower than the equivalent figures for Europe, where in 1911 between 8 
and 18% of the population was  in  primary and  secondary  education. Additionally, they made 
efforts  to  improve  literacy.  In  1901,  the  literacy  rate  in  India  was  about  5.4%;  by  India's 
independence it was nearly 16.5%. 
The credit for fostering education to the masses following independence in 1947 chiefly goes to 
the  first  prime  minister  Jawaharlal  Nehru.  India's  first  education  minister  Maulana  Azad 
envisaged  strong  central  government  control  over  education  throughout  the  country,  with  a 
uniform educational system. [15]  However, given the cultural and linguistic diversity of India, only 
higher education, which dealt with science and technology, came under the jurisdiction of the 
central government. The government also held powers to make national policies for educational 
development and could regulate selected aspects of education throughout India.  
The central government of India formulated the National Policy on Education (NPE) in 1968 and 
in 1986 and also reinforced the Programme of Action (POA) in 1992. In 2008 the government 
initiated several measures the launching of DPEP (District Primary Education Programme) and 
SSA (Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,ssa.nic.in India's initiative for Education for All) and setting up of 
Navodaya Vidyalaya and other selective schools in every district, advances in female education, 
inter-disciplinary research and establishment of open universities. India's NPE also contains the 
National  System  of  Education,  which  ensures  some  uniformity  while  taking  into  account 
regional education needs. The NPE also stresses on higher spending on education, envisaging a 
budget of more than 6% of the Gross Domestic Product. While the need for wider reform in the 
primary and secondary sectors is recognized as an issue, the emphasis is also on the development 
of science and technology education infrastructure. 
2.1 Overview 
India's education system is divided into different levels such as pre-primary level, primary level, 
elementary  education,  secondary  education,  undergraduate  level  and  postgraduate  level.  The 
National  Council  of  Educational  Research  and  Training  (NCERT)  is  the  apex  body  for 
curriculum  related  matters  for  school  education  in  India.  The  NCERT  provides  support  and 
technical assistance to a number of schools in India and oversees many aspects of enforcement of 
education policies. In India, the various curriculum bodies governing school education system 
are: 
  The state government boards, in which the majority of Indian children are enrolled. 
  The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE). CBSE conducts two examinations, 
namely, the All India Secondary School Examination, AISSE (Class/Grade 10) and the 
All India Senior School Certificate Examination, AISSCE (Class/Grade 12). 
  The Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE). CISCE conducts 
three examinations, namely, the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE - Class/ 
Grade 10); The Indian School Certificate (ISC - Class/ Grade 12) and the Certificate in 
Vocational Education (CVE - Class/Grade 12). 
  The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
42  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
  International schools affiliated to the International Baccalaureate Programme and/or the 
Cambridge International Examinations. 
  Islamic  Madrasah  schools,  whose boards  are controlled by local  state  governments,  or 
autonomous, or affiliated with Darul Uloom Deoband. 
  Autonomous schools like Woodstock School, The Sri Aurobindo International Center of 
Education Puducherry, Auroville, Patha Bhavan and Ananda Marga Gurukula. 
In  addition,  NUEPA  (National  University  of  Educational  Planning  and  Administration)  and 
NCTE  (National  Council  for  Teacher  Education)  are  responsible  for  the  management  of  the 
education system and teacher accreditation. 
2.2 10+2+3 Pattern 
The central and most state board uniformly follows the "10+2+3" pattern of education. In this 
pattern, 10 years of primary and secondary education is followed by 2 years of higher secondary 
(usually  in  schools  having  the  higher  secondary  facility,  or  in  colleges),  and  then  3  years  of 
college education for bachelor's degree. The 10 years is further divided into 5 years of primary 
education  and  3  years  of  upper  primary,  followed  by  2  years  of  high  school.  This  pattern 
originated from the recommendation the Education Commission of 1964–66.  
3. Primary Education System in India 
The  Indian  government  lays  emphasis  to  primary  education  up  to  the  age  of  fourteen  years 
(referred to  as  Elementary  Education in  India.)  The  Indian  government  has also  banned child 
labour in order to ensure that the children do not enter unsafe working conditions. However, both 
free education and the ban on child labour are difficult to enforce due to economic disparity and 
social conditions. 80% of all recognized schools at the Elementary Stage are government run or 
supported, making it the largest provider of education in the Country.  
However,  due  to  shortage  of  resources  and  lack  of  political  will,  this  system  suffers  from 
massive gaps including high pupil to teacher ratios, shortage of infrastructure and poor levels of 
teacher  training.  Figures  released  by  the  Indian  government  in  2011  show  that  there  were 
5,816,673  elementary  school  teachers  in  India.  As  of  March  2012  there  were  2,127,000 
secondary school teachers in India. Education has also been made free for children for 6 to 14 
years of age or up to class VIII under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act 2009.  
There  have  been  several  efforts  to  enhance  quality  made  by  the  government.  The  District 
Education Revitalization Programme (DERP) was launched in 1994 with an aim to universalize 
primary education in India by reforming and vitalizing the existing primary education system. 
85%  of  the  DERP  was  funded  by  the  central  government  and  the  remaining  15  percent  was 
funded  by  the  states.  The  DERP,  which  had  opened  160000  new  schools  including  84000 
alternative  education  schools  delivering  alternative  education  to  approximately  3.5  million 
children, was also supported by UNICEF and other international programmes.  
This primary education scheme has also shown a high Gross Enrollment Ratio of 93–95% for the 
last three years in some states. Significant improvement in staffing and enrollment of girls has 
also been made as a part of this scheme. The current scheme for universalization of Education 
for  All  is  the  Sarva  Shiksha  Abhiyan  which  is  one  of  the  largest  education  initiatives  in  the 
world. Enrollment has been enhanced, but the levels of quality remain low. 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
43  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
4. Private Education 
According  to  current  estimates,  80%  of  all  schools  are  government  schools  making  the 
government  the  major  provider  of  education.  However,  because  of  poor  quality  of  public 
education, 27% of Indian children are privately educated. With more than 50% children enrolling 
in  private  schools  in  urban  areas,  the  balance  has  already  tilted  towards  private  schooling  in 
cities; even in rural areas, nearly 20% of the children in 2004-5 were enrolled in private schools. 
According to some research, private schools often provide superior results at a multiple of the 
unit  cost  of  government  schools.  However,  others  have  suggested  that  private  schools  fail  to 
provide education to the poorest families, a selective being only a fifth of the schools and have in 
the past ignored Court orders for their regulation. 
In their favour, it has been pointed out that private schools cover the entire curriculum and offer 
extra-curricular activities such as science fairs, general knowledge, sports, music and drama. The 
pupil teacher ratios are much better in private schools (1:31 to 1:37 for government schools and 
more teachers in private schools are female . 
There is some disagreement over which system has better educated teachers. According to the 
latest  DISE  survey,  the  percentage  of  untrained  teachers  (parameters)  is  54.91%  in  private, 
compared to 44.88% in government schools and only 2.32% teachers in unaided schools receive 
in-service training compared to 43.44% for government schools. The competition in the school 
market is intense, yet most schools make profit. However, the number of private schools in India 
is still low - the share of private institutions is 7% (with upper primary being 21% and secondary 
32% - source: fortress team research). 
Even the poorest often go to private schools despite the fact that government schools are free. A 
study found that 65% of schoolchildren in Hyderabad's slums attend private schools.  
5. Homeschooling 
Homeschooling is legal in India, though it is the less explored option. The Indian Government's 
stance on the issue is that parents are free to teach their children at home, if they wish to and 
have  the  means.  HRD  Minister  Kapil  Sibal  has  stated  that  despite  the  RTE  Act  of  2009,  if 
someone decides not to send his/her children to school, the government would not interfere.  
6. Secondary Education 
The  National  Policy  on  Education  (NPE),  1986,  has  provided  for  environment  awareness, 
science and technology education, and introduction of traditional elements such as Yoga into the 
Indian secondary school system. Secondary education covers children 14–18 which covers 88.5 
million children according to the Census, 2001. However, enrolment figures show that only 31 
million of these children were attending schools in 2001–02, which means that two-third of the 
population remained out of school.  
A  significant  feature  of  India's  secondary  school  system  is  the  emphasis  on  inclusion  of  the 
disadvantaged sections of the society. Professionals from established institutes are often called to 
support in vocational training. Another feature of India's secondary school system is its emphasis 
on profession based vocational  training to  help students  attain  skills  for finding a vocation of 
his/her  choosing.  A  significant  new  feature  has  been  the  extension  of  SSA  to  secondary 
education in the form of the Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan. 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
44  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
A special Integrated Education for Disabled Children (IEDC) programme was started in 1974 
with  a  focus  on  primary  education.  but  which  was  converted  into  Inclusive  Education  at 
Secondary  Stage  Another  notable  special  programme,  the  Kendriya  Vidyalaya  project,  was 
started for the employees of the central government of India, who are distributed throughout the 
country.  The  government  started  the  Kendriya  Vidyalaya  project  in  1965  to  provide  uniform 
education in institutions following the same syllabus at the same pace regardless of the location 
to which the employee's family has been transferred.  
A multilingual web portal on Primary Education is available with rich multimedia content for 
children  and  forums  to  discuss  on  the  Educational  issues.  India  Development  Gateway  is  a 
nationwide initiative that seeks to facilitate rural empowerment through provision of responsive 
information, products and services in local languages. 
7. Higher Education 
After  passing  the  Higher  Secondary  Examination  (the  grade  12  examination),  students  may 
enroll  in  general  degree  programs  such  as  bachelor's  degree  in  arts,  commerce  or  science,  or 
professional  degree  programs  such  as  engineering,  law  or  medicine.  India's  higher  education 
system is the third largest in the world, after China and the United States. The main governing 
body  at  the  tertiary  level  is  the  University  Grants  Commission  (India),  which  enforces  its 
standards,  advises  the  government,  and  helps  coordinate  between  the  centre  and  the  state. 
Accreditation for higher learning is overseen by 12 autonomous institutions established by the 
University Grants Commission. In India, education system is reformed. In future, India will be 
one of the largest education hubs. 
As of 2009, India has 20 central universities, 215 state universities, 100 deemed universities, 5 
institutions  established  and  functioning  under  the  State  Act,  and  33  institutes  which  are  of 
national  importance.  Other  institutions  include  16000  colleges,  including  1800  exclusive 
women's  colleges,  functioning  under  these  universities  and  institutions.  The  emphasis  in  the 
tertiary level of education lies on science and technology. Indian educational institutions by 2004 
consisted of a large number of technology institutes. Distance learning is also a feature of the 
Indian higher education system.  
Some institutions of India, such as the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), have been globally 
acclaimed for their standard of undergraduate education in engineering. The IITs enroll about 
10,000 students annually and the alumni have contributed to both the growth of the private sector 
and  the  public  sectors  of  India.  However  the  IIT's  have  not  had  significant  impact  on 
fundamental scientific research and innovation. Several other institutes of fundamental research 
such as the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science(IACS), Indian Institute of Science 
IISC), Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Harishchandra Research Institute (HRI), 
are acclaimed for their standard of research in basic sciences and mathematics. However, India 
has failed to produce world class universities both in the private sector or the public sector.  
Besides top rated universities which provide highly competitive world class education to their 
pupils, India is also home to many universities which have been founded with the sole objective 
of making easy money. Regulatory authorities like UGC and AICTE have been trying very hard 
to extirpate the menace of private universities which are running courses without any affiliation 
or recognition. Indian Government has failed to check on these education shops, which are run 
by  big  businessmen  &  politicians.  Many  private  colleges  and  universities  do  not  fulfill  the 
required criterion by the Government and central bodies (UGC, AICTE, MCI, BCI etc.) and take 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
45  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
students for a ride. For example, many institutions in India continue to run unaccredited courses 
as there is no legislation strong enough to ensure legal action against them. Quality assurance 
mechanism has  failed to stop  misrepresentations and malpractices in  higher education. At the 
same time regulatory bodies have been accused of corruption, specifically in the case of deemed-
universities.  In this  context  of lack of solid quality assurance mechanism,  institutions  need to 
step-up and set higher standards of self-regulation.  
Government  of  India is  aware of the plight  of higher education sector and has been trying to 
bring reforms; however, 15 bills are still awaiting discussion and approval in the Parliament. One 
of the most talked about bill is Foreign Universities Bill, which is supposed to facilitate entry of 
foreign universities to establish campuses in India. The bill is still under discussion and even if it 
gets passed, its feasibility and effectiveness is questionable as it misses the context, diversity and 
segment of international foreign institutions interested in India. One of the approaches to make 
internationalization  of  Indian  higher  education  effective  is  to  develop  a  coherent  and 
comprehensive policy which aims at infusing excellence, bringing institutional diversity and aids 
in capacity building.  
Three Indian universities were listed in the Times Higher Education list of the world’s top 200 
universities — Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institutes of Management, and Jawaharlal 
Nehru University in 2005 and 2006. Six Indian Institutes of Technology and the Birla Institute of 
Technology and Science – Pilani were listed among the top 20 science and technology schools in 
Asia by Asiaweek. [60]  The Indian School of Business situated in Hyderabad was ranked number 
12  in  global  MBA  rankings  by  the  Financial  Times  of  London  in  2010while  the  All  India 
Institute  of  Medical  Sciences  has  been  recognized  as  a  global  leader  in  medical  research  and 
treatment.  
8. Technical Education 
The number of graduates coming out of technical colleges increased to  over 700,000 in 2011 
from 550,000 in FY 2010. However, 75% of technical graduates and more than 85% of general 
graduates  are  unemployable  by  India's  high-growth  global  industries,  including  information 
technology.  
From the first Five Year Plan onwards India's emphasis was to develop a pool of scientifically 
inclined manpower. India's National Policy on Education (NPE) provisioned for an apex body 
for regulation and development of higher technical education, which came into being as the All 
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) in 1987 through an act of the Indian parliament. 
At  the  Central(federal)  level,  the  Technology,  the  Indian  Institute  of  Space  Science  and 
Technology,  the  National  Institutes  of  Technology  and  the  Indian  Institutes  of  Information 
Technology,  Rajiv  Gandhi  Institute  of  Petroleum  Technology  are  deemed  of  national 
importance.  
The Indian Institutes of Technology are among the nation's premier education facilities. Since 
2002,  Several  Regional  Engineering  Colleges  (RECs)  have  been  converted  into  National 
Institutes of Technology giving them Institutes of National Importance status. 
The Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology : The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas  (MOP&NG),  Government  of  India  set  up  the  institute  at  Jais,  Rae  Bareli  district,  Uttar 
Pradesh  through  an  Act  of  Parliament.  RGIPT  has  been  accorded  "Institute  of  National 
Importance"  along  the  lines  of  the  Indian  Institute  of  Technology  (IIT),  Indian  Institute  of 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
46  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
Management  (IIM) and  National  Institute  of  Technology  (NIT). With the status  of a Deemed 
University, the institute awards degrees in its own right. 
The  UGC  has  inter-university  centres  at  a  number  of  locations  throughout  India  to  promote 
common  research,  e.g.  the  Nuclear  Science  Centre  at  the  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University,  New 
Delhi. Besides there are some British established colleges such as Harcourt Butler Technological 
Institute situated in Kanpur and King George Medical University situated in Lucknow which are 
important center of higher education. 
Central Universities such as Banaras Hindu University, Jamia Millia Islamia University, Delhi 
University,  Mumbai  University,  University  of  Calcutta,  etc.  are  too  pioneers  of  technical 
education in the country. 
In  addition  to  above  institutes,  efforts  towards  the  enhancement  of  technical  education  are 
supplemented by a number of recognized Professional Engineering Societies such as 
1.  Institution of Mechanical Engineers (India) 
2.  Institution of Engineers (India) 
3.  Institution of Chemical Engineering (India) 
4.  Institution of Electronics and Tele-Communication Engineers (India) 
5.  Indian Institute of Metals 
6.  Institution of Industrial Engineers (India) 
7.  Institute of Town Planners (India) 
8.  Indian Institute of Architects 
that  conduct  Engineering/Technical  Examinations  at  different  levels(Degree  and  diploma)  for 
working professionals desirous of improving their technical qualifications. 
9. Open and Distance Learning 
At  school  level,  National  Institute  of  Open  Schooling  (NIOS)  provides  opportunities  for 
continuing  education  to  those  who  missed  completing  school  education.  14  lakh  students  are 
enrolled at the secondary and higher secondary level through open and distance learning. 
At  higher  education  level,  Indira  Gandhi  National  Open  University  (IGNOU)  co-ordinates 
distance learning. It has a cumulative enrolment of about 15 lakhs, serviced through 53 regional 
centres  and  1,400  study  centres  with  25,000  counsellors.  The  Distance  Education  Council 
(DEC),  an  authority  of  IGNOU  is  co-coordinating  13  State  Open  Universities  and  119 
institutions  of  correspondence  courses  in  conventional  universities.  While  distance  education 
institutions  have  expanded  at  a  very  rapid  rate,  but  most  of  these  institutions  need  an  up 
gradation in their standards and performance. There is a large proliferation of courses covered by 
distance mode without adequate infrastructure, both human and physical. There is a strong need 
to correct these imbalances.  
Arjun  Singh  Center  for  Distance  and  Open  Learning,  Jamia  Millia  Islamia  University  was 
established  with  the  assistance  of  Distance  Education  Council  in  September  2002.  Major 
objectives of the Centre are to provide opportunities for higher education to those who are not 
able  to  draw  benefits  from  formal  system  of  education.  The  Open  Learning  System  allows  a 
learner to determine his pace of learning and provides education at the doorstep of the learner. 
The mode of transaction is through self-learning print material, supplemented by audio and video 
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
47  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
programmes.  It  has  further  scope  of  students  accessing  material  through  internet  and  various 
other media. 
10. Conclusion 
Improvement  in  the  Indian  system  of  schooling   is  an  elephantine  task  and  has  become  very 
important .What our students are learning now is mostly redundant .Syllabus needs to be skill 
based rather than mugging up of large chunks of theory .I am shocked to see that students even 
mug up mathematical sums before the exams. Learning by doing should  be our primary focus 
and they need to be taught what is relevant .Invalid information in textbooks take away a lot of 
productive learning time .We also do not have any system in traditional schools to tap the talents 
of  students  apart  from  academic  achievement  as  we  lay  so  much  importance  on  marks  and 
grades. 
References 
1.  "A special report on India: Creaking, groaning: Infrastructure is India’s biggest handicap". 
The Economist. 11 December 2008.  
2.  "Education in India". World Bank.  
3.  "Higher Education'', National Informatics Centre, Government of India". Education.nic.in. 
Retrieved. 
4.  "India Country Summary of Higher Education". World Bank.  
5.  "Literacy Scenario in India (1951–1991)". Retrieved 29 December 2009.  
6.  "National Policy on Education (with modifications undertaken in 1992)" (PDF). National 
Council of Educational Research and Training. Retrieved 10 December 2012.  
7.  "National  University  of  Educational  Planning  and  Administration".  Nuepa.org.  Retrieved 
2012-08-16.  
8.  "NCTE : National Council For Teacher Education". Ncte-india.org. Retrieved 2012-08-16.  
9.  "Present education in India". Studyguideindia.com. Retrieved 2012-08-16.  
10. "Private Education in India can Benefit Poor People".  
11. "Really Old School," Garten, Jeffrey E. New York Times, 9 December 2006.  
12. "RTE: Homeschooling too is fine, says Sibal". Times of India. 2010.  
13. "Science and Technology Education". Press Information Bureau. Retrieved 2009-08-08.  
14. Amit Varma (2007-01-15). "Why India Needs School Vouchers". Wall Street Journal.  
15. B. Nivedita, "The Destruction of the Indian System of Education," Adapted from a speech 
given to the Vivekananda Study Circle, IIT-Madras, January 1998.  
16. Bamzai, Kaveree (24 December 2009). "1977-10+2+3 system of education: The new class 
structure". India Today. Retrieved 10 December 2012.  
17. Blackwell, 91–92  
18. Desai,  Sonalde,  Amaresh  Dubey,  Reeve  Vanneman  and  Rukmini  Banerji.  2009.  "Private 
Schooling in India: A New Landscape," India Policy Forum Vol. 5. Pp. 1-58, Bery, 
Suman, Barry Bosworth and Arvind Panagariya (Editors). New Delhi: Sage  
19. Estimate for India, from India, The Hindu  
20. Ferguson,  Niall  (2003).  Empire:  How  Britain  made  the  Modern  World.  Penguin.  p. 191. 
ISBN 0-14-100754-0.  
21. Geeta Gandhi Kingdon. "The progress of school education in India".  
22. How To Save The World's Back Office, by Sramana Mitra of Forbes, 03.14.08  
23. http://education.nic.in/Elementary/free%20and%20compulsory.pdf  
24. http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/RPE-2010-11.pdf  
25. http://www.dise.in/Downloads/Publications/Publications%20200910/Flash%20Statistics%2
02009-10.pdf  
Dr. Jayantibhai I. Patel / International Journal for Research in 
Education 
          Vol. 2, Issue:2, February 2013 
                    (IJRE)   ISSN:2320-091X 
 
48  Online International, Reviewed & Indexed Monthly Journal                      www.raijmr.com 
RET Academy for International Journals of Multidisciplinary Research (RAIJMR) 
 
 
 
26. India 2004: A Reference Annual (53rd edition)  
27. India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition), 215  
28. India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition), 230–234  
29. India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition), 231  
30. India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition), 233  
31. India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition), 237  
32. India achieves 27% decline in poverty, Press Trust of India via Sify.com, 2008-09-12  
33. India still Asia's reluctant tiger, by Zareer Masani of BBC Radio 4, 27 February 2008  
34. Indian education: Sector outlook  
35. Primary  Education  —  India  Development  Gateway.  Indg.in  (2010-09-10).  Retrieved  on 
2011-03-21.  
36. Prime  Minister  Manmohan  Singh.  "PM’s  address  at  the  150th  Anniversary  Function  of 
University of Mumbai".  
37. RA-208  
38. Secondary Education. Education.nic.in. Retrieved on 2011-03-21.  
39. Secondary Education. Education.nic.in. Retrieved on 2011-03-21.  
40. Singh, Y.K.; Nath, R.. History of Indian education system. APH Publishing. pp. 172–175. 
ISBN 978-81-7648-932-4. Retrieved 11 January 2013.  
41. SPECIAL REPORT: THE EDUCATION RACE, by Newsweek, 18–25 August 2011 issue  
42. Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 150  
43. Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 150–151  
44. Vyas,  Neena  (30  June  2012).  "http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/10-2-3-scheme-seeks-to-
divide-schooling-into-two-stages-of-education/1/203052.html".  India  Today. 
Retrieved 10 December 2012.  
 
